# CMPSC 480: Portfolio project reflection

My site build process started off pretty interesting as I had no idea how to create a site or even think about it until professor Luman helped me to deploy it. After that he showed me how to make edits to the site and I used trial and error for things I did not know after that, deleting and adding files when I thought I should to see what it did to my site. Challenges I had during the process was trying to remove most of things I did not need such as links already in the template or articles that were not mine. I did not know how to remove those things so it was trial and error by deleting files and making edits to see what happened. In addition, changing the images was difficult for me because I did not understand how to do it. I relied on peers for help on understanding this. This site is built for future employers who might be interested in hiring me to hopefully work in the NBA. I attempted to cater this site to NBA employers because of my desire to work in the sports industry. I did this by focusing on skills or other information that would be helpful and wanted by them. Lastly, my design decisions were informed by the various assignments that I completed throughout the semested because as I said, I had no experience with any of this stuff really before taking this class. This class allowed me to develop a professional resume along with supporting documents to help me succeed after college. Throughout each of the assignments we completed I learned the way different documents should look and the content they should contain which helped me to figure out what to include in the site.
