---
title: How do Shooting Percentages Affect NBA Teams’ Winning Percentage?
emoji: 💾
metaDescription: This is a sample meta description. If one is not present in your page/project's front matter, the default metadata.desciption will be used instead.
date: 2019-01-01T00:00:00.000Z
summary: This is a paper I wrote on the NBA
---

#### How do Shooting Percentages Affect NBA Teams’ Winning Percentage?

### Introduction

A lot goes into whether or not a team will win a basketball game or not. With 48 minutes of play, and many different types of team styles ranging from post centric, space and pace or teams who are focused on a perimeter dominant game. Each style is different, requiring players and coaches with a certain mind and skillset to be successful. In addition, basketball games feature randomness that cannot be accounted for because each game has different plays and circumstances that happen.

Something that always caught my eye was the winning percentage for each team in the league. When thinking about this, I often will look at the teams statistics on the season, scanning the sheet to look for reasons as to why or how they finished with the record they did. In order to take a deeper dive into this topic, I chose to test and look at it as the topic for this paper. For starters, I am choosing to look at different types of shooting percentages in the games (free throw, 3 pt, and field goal percentages) to assess the correlation between those specific statistics and overall winning percentage for each team. This topic interests me because I am a huge fan of sports with basketball being one of my true loves in this world. I have future aspirations of working in the NBA potentially in a Basketball Operations role helping to build teams. Due to that, I always look at the game from a different perspective than regular fans and hope to use this paper to gain some knowledge and skill in analyzing basketball statistics to help me in future career endeavors.

Although the nba is filled with statisticians who look at common and advanced statistics to aid in decision making daily, I haven’t ever read or heard about someone doing a study exactly like this one looking into the specifics of how each team shoots and then using that to analyze their winning percentage for the year which is the value this paper could provide. In order to do this, I will have to combat some unknown things as I have never worked around or participated in higher level basketball and the game is so advanced at that level. Due to this, there could be factors in each of these games that I do not know of or think of. Also, variations can be seen in random plays or events that can happen in a game which I could not account for in a study. Things like injuries, ejections, or referees can all alter the end result of games and seasons because they can have a major effect if important players are involved. This gap caused by randomness, makes it hard to fully assess a team. In the end, I hope to observe real correlation between the data I chose and the amount of games each team wins but am going in with the simple goal of understanding. Understanding what the data means and how it connects.

### Background/Literature Review

In order to summarize some of the analytical work that has been done before me I chose three different articles to go over to get a better understanding of the topic. The three articles I chose were “How Different Metrics Correlate with Winning in the NBA over 30 years” by David Peterson, “Which NBA Statistics Actually Translate to wins?” but Chinmay Vaidya, and lastly “NBA’s Most Valuable Statistic Discovered: How To Predict Team WIns with 95 % Accuracy” by Ryan Sullivan. The first article by David Peterson is about how different NBA stats affect winning. Peterson looked at the trend of specific statistics over the past 30 years which helps to demonstrate the direction the game is trending in. He used certain metrics such as field goal percentage, 3 point percentage, 2 point percentage, and free throw percentage to demonstrate their correlation with winning basketball games. In his findings, he concluded that 3 point shooting has become increasingly important in the game plans of teams over recent years with teams that shoot a high volume of threes at a good to great percentage have a better chance of winning than those teams who focus on twos. In addition, he found that 2 point percentage and field goal percentage have a high correlation with winning. Next he found that 3 point percentage has a medium correlation with winning while free throw percentage appears to have a fairly low correlation when it comes to winning basketball games.

The next article I want to take a look at is by Chinmay Vaidya. This article is about seeing which NBA statistics truly correlate to winning and which stats are less important when it comes to getting wins. In this article, the specific team statistics that were used in the experiment were offensive rating, defensive rating, rebound differential, 3 point percentage, field goal percentage, assist to turnover ratio, 3 point attempts, field goal attempts, and pace. Using these stats. Vaidya calculated the difference between each team's winning percentage and their ranking in reference to each of the statistics that were looked at. When doing that, Vaidya looked at the top ten teams in each of those statistical categories, making note of how many of those top ten teams made the playoffs which gives insight into each of the variables effects on winning because only the top eight teams based on winning percentages and tiebreakers from each conference – the eastern and western – make the playoffs meaning if a team is top in a specific statistic, and also made the playoffs; that stat might lead to winning games as they would have a high enough winning percentage to make the playoffs. After doing that, Vaidya dove deeper to analyze each stat by itself to assess its importance in reference to winning compared to the other variables that were looked at. He found that the variable with the highest association to winning was offensive efficiency while the variable with the lowest correlation to winning was pace, which is how fast the team moves up and down the court and how fast they put up shots. When looking at Vaidya’s assessment of the statistics I will be looking at, he included two which were field goal percentage and 3 point percentage. When assessing those statistics, the author concluded that 3 point percentage is loosely associated with winning while field goal percentage did not have much of a correlation on winning in his findings. Overall, he noted that some statistics are more important than others but all of them have some effect on winning.

The final article I want to look at was written by Ryan Sullivan. This article was about a compilation of nba statistics spanning 70 years which were pieced together to then answer a question similar to mine. That being, what stats are important and relevant in winning and what are not. In order to come up with the final answer, Sullivan created a graph analyzing each stats correlation to winning percentage over the past 20 years. Most of the statistics that were tested did not have a high enough correlation to winning to be discussed but there were some metrics he discussed. Out of those, I will focus on the same variables I will be using in my experiment. Of the variables I will look at, Sullivan only included 3 point percentage and effective field goal percentage which is similar to field goal percentage which I will look at. Sullivan found effective field goal percentage to have a medium correlation with winning percentage at .54 while he found a smaller correlation to 3 point percentage in respect to winning at .472. To conclude, the author began to talk about something he had read which was “the 4 factors of basketball success” which were shooting percentage, turnover rate, offensive rebounding percentage, and getting to the foul line which he used to pioneer his own study in which he figured out how to predict team wins at a 95% rate using what he called the Sully Four Factor Rating to predict the games at a higher rate than ever before.

After combing through all three of the articles, it is clear to me that there is a foundation of work for me to follow behind as all three of these authors have done some version of the study I want to conduct in this paper, just with different variables than mine. Limitations within these studies that I took note of were similar to limitations I described above. Once again, with randomness as far as injuries or referees, it is hard to quantify those variables which I feel have the potential to influence winning. I hope to piggyback off of the research done by these other authors to answer my question relating to the influence field goal percentage, 3 point percentage, and free throw percentage have on NBA teams winning.

### Data

The data I plan to use in my analysis is NBA team data for the metrics of winning percentage as the dependent variable, while the other variables of field goal percentage, 3 point percentage, and free throw percentage are the independent variables. Winning percentage is calculated by looking at wins compared to games played. Field goal percentage is calculated by averaging the percentage you shoot from two, three, and from the foul line. The 3 point percentage is calculated by dividing the number of makes from 3 by the number taken while the free throw percentage is obtained by dividing the free throw made by attempts. Each of these variables are calculated to percentages and there are 30 samples (one per team) for each of them. Although I got this data from NBA.com, it is collected through the use of cameras that track player movement and actions throughout the course of the game.

### Methodology

The regression model I chose to use for my experiment attempting to make a connection between winning percentage and field goal percentage, 3 point percentage, and free throw percentage can be seen in figure 1. In this particular regression model, the dependent variable is winning percentage while the other three variables will function as the explanatory variables. For starters, I did not utilize the log of any of the variables because all of the variables were already percentages after being calculated which is essentially what using a log would have done. In addition, I did not use any dummy variables for this calculation as all of the data that I used for the analysis  were well represented and easy to use and understand for this model. All of the NBA statistics can be quantified and well represented by their actual names and do not need a dummy variable to accurately represent them.

The next thing I chose to do was to conduct the White’s test and Breucsh-Pagan test for heteroskedasticity because if you do have it in a regression further regressions need to be done to achieve accurate data. When running the two different tests for heteroskedasticity I realized that the regression model I used did not have heteroskedasticity. This is important because in order to have a successful regression you need to have homoscedasticity in the variables meaning  you have equal or similar variances amongst each of the variables. This ensures that each variable is consistent with the rest making sure that no bias or skewness can be seen in the regression. Bias and skewed data in the regression model would only result in findings that are not accurate.

### Empirical Results

In order to look at the results from the regression to analyze the effect that field goal percentage, 3 point percentage, and free throw percentage have on winning percentage for each of the 30 NBA teams I will start by analyzing the coefficients of each of the variables to see the effect they have on overall winning percentage for the teams. First, looking at the coefficient for field goal percentage which is about 2.77 means that for every 1 percent increase in field goal percentage, a 2.77 percent increase can be seen in winning percentage. The next variable used in the regression was 3 point percentage. When looking at the coefficient of about 4.76 for that variable we can see that for every 1 percent increase in 3 point percentage, a 4.76 percent increase in winning percentage can be seen. Furthermore, in our last explanatory variable which is free throw percentage; it has the coefficient of .67. This indicates that for every 1 percent increase in free throw percentage, an increase of .67 for winning percentage can be observed. As you can see, 3 point percentage increases winning percentage the most while field goal percentage is slightly less effective at leading to wins. Although it is not very significant, even free throw percentage increases. From that, we can see that all of the explanatory variables have a positive effect on winning percentage. When looking at the t stats and the p values for each of the variables, you can tell which of the variables are of significance in effect on winning percentage. When looking at two of the variables of field goal percentage and free throw percentage we fail to reject the null hypothesis as the t stat is not greater than 1.96 with the p value being less than .05 meaning those two variables are not statistically significant when calculating winning percentage for each of the teams. Furthermore, when looking at the variable of 3 point percentage we reject the null hypothesis because the t stat is greater than 1.96 with the p value being less than .05 meaning that the variable of 3 point percentage is statistically significant in calculating the winning percentage for each team. The next thing I want to take note of is the f statistic for each of the variables which indicates if the null hypothesis for each of the variables is true. The f statistic in the regression model I ran is 10.73 meaning that the mean sum of squares of the model is about 10.73 times greater than the residual. Lastly I will look at the R2 value of the regression model I used. The R2 of a regression model indicates how much of the dependent variable is explained by the explanatory variables used in your model. The R2 of my regression analysis was .5531. From this, we can interpret that about 55.31 percent of winning percentage is explained by the variables I used in the model. This R2 value indicates a medium level of correlation between the variables because high correlation would be an R2 of around 90 percent while a low one would be around 30 percent. The R2 shows that my model could be improved by adding more variables or changing the ones I used to demonstrate a higher correlation to winning percentage. When thinking about these results, they are somewhat close to what I expected to see as I know there is a lot more that goes into winning games in the NBA. I figured 3 point percentage would be significant because scoring 3s is better than 2s, and also thought field goal percentage would have a slight correlation to winning percentage because making shots and scoring is important to winning. Lastly, I did not think the free throw percentage would be significant because some teams do not shoot many foul shots at all, meaning it is not very significant in many games and situations. Those anticipations were confirmed by the regression model.  

When looking at my findings compared to the findings from the literature mentioned above, it lines up fairly well. In all three of the articles I examined above, 3 point percentage was found to be increasingly important in winning games in the NBA as 3 pointers are becoming more prominent and important in the game as analytics have taken over which is similar to what I found as 3 pointers had the highest correlation to winning percentage in my model. Secondly, field goal percentage was found to be important and significant to winning games in the three articles I looked at. This was close to what I found in my model because although field goal percentage did not have the same correlation to winning as 3 point percentage did, it was still somewhat significant and had a decent correlation to winning. The last variable in my model, free throw percentage was not looked at in some of the articles but was not seen as a significant effect on winning percentage in the article it was mentioned in. This supports my findings as I found a very small correlation between free throw percentage and winning percentage while free throw percentage was not significant to winning percentage in the model.

### Conclusion

In conclusion, the regression analysis I ran utilized winning percentage as the dependent variable with field goal percentage, 3 point percentage, and free throw percentage as the explanatory variables. Based on the regression analysis, 3 point percentage was found to have the highest correlation and significance towards winning percentage while field goal percentage had a medium correlation and significance towards winning percentage. Lastly, free throw percentage was seen to have a small correlation towards winning but was not found to be significant in contributing to winning percentage. The R2 value of my regression model indicated that the explanatory variables I chose were somewhat responsible in explaining winning percentage but also indicated many improvements to the model could be made to increase the R2 to achieve a better model.

### Further Issues

As far as improvements that could be made to achieve an improved model, something I did not like was the lack of samples in the data due to their only being 30 teams and me only using the data from one season for each of the variables. In order to correct this, I would choose to potentially use data from more seasons to see how that would affect the model. The next improvement I would have chosen to make is to include more variables or some different variables into the model as 3 point percentage was the only variable that was found to have a high significance to winning percentage and the R2 value was only about 52 percent for my model. In order to achieve a more accurate model in calculating what goes into winning percentage, I would like to figure out better variables to include that would have a higher correlation and significance towards winning which also would hopefully increase the R2 value. Lastly, I would have liked to create dummy variables to account for things such as injuries, referees/foul calls, and the stadium the game was played in (home team or away team). All 3 of these things are hard to account for in a game because they are random events, but each of them play a large role in whether a team wins or not depending on the circumstances. Further analysis branching from mine, using the suggestions I have made above, appears to be the next step with this topic as there are definitely ways to improve this model for higher precision.

### Bibliography

-Peterson, David. “How Different Metrics Correlate with Winning in the NBA over 30 Years.” Medium, Towards Data Science, 28 May 2020, <https://towardsdatascience.com/how-different-metrics-correlate-with-winning-in-the-nba-over-30-years-57219d3d1c8>.

-Vaidya, Chinmay. “Which NBA Statistics Actually Translate to Wins?” Stadium, Watch Stadium, 15 July 2019, <https://watchstadium.com/which-nba-statistics-actually-translate-to-wins-07-13-2019/>.

-Sullivan, Ryan. “NBA's Most Valuable Statistic Discovered: How to Predict Team Wins with 95% Accuracy.” Sports Gambling Podcast, SGPN, 20 Apr. 2020, <https://www.sportsgamblingpodcast.com/2020/04/20/nba-most-valuable-statistic/>.
